Cinder is the block storage service for Openstack. It provides persistent block storage to instances running in Openstack, similar to how physical hard drives work for physical servers. Cinder does the lifecycle management of block storage device, meaning you can create, attach and manage volumes(block storage devices) independently of instances.

Cinder virtualizes the management of block storage devices and provides end users with a self-service API to request and consume those without requiring any knowledge of where their storage is deployed.

Cinder also manages volume snapshots. Snapshots can be taken of volume or of instances. Snapshot is read only point in time of copy of volume.

Backup is an archived copy of volume that is stored in swift object storage.

**Architecture**
**Cinder API** is a wsgi application that accepts and validates rest based Json or XML requests from client and routes them to other cinder processes as appropriate over the message bus.

The Operations possible thtough the API are:
- Volume create, delete, list, show.
- Create from volume image or snapshot
- Snapshot
- Create delete list
- Show volume
- Attach detach

**Cinder Volume daemon** accepts request from other cinder processes like the scheduler and serves as the operational container for cinder drivers. The cinder volume service responds to read and write requests sent to the block storage service to maintain state. Drivers contain backend specific code to communicate with various storage types. 

**Cinder Scheduler daemon** selects the optimal storage provider node on which to create volume.

**Cinder backup daemon** provides backing up volumes of any type to a backup storage providers, which could be swift.